# Server for Wordpress and Standalone CiviCRM

2026-05-13
Ian

## Objective

VentraIP host the [cmrailtrial.org.au](cmrailtrial.org.au) WordPress website, while CiviCRM is hosted on [cmrailtrail.civicrm.org](cmrailtrail.civicrm.org). The intention is to have CiviCRM Standalone installed on VentraIP hosting system. The Wordpress website would rremain as the main domain, *cmrailtril.org.au* and the CiviCRM would be moved to the VentraIP sub-domain *crm.cmrailtrail.org.au*.

A simulation of this WordPress/CiviCRM, domain/sub-domain, configuration will be performed on a standalone PC running the Ubuntu Server version of Linux. This server will be configured to replicate the VentraIP hosting server.

Upon sucessful testing of the PC, a request will be made to VentraIP top provide the sub-domain. CiviCRM Standalone will the be installed into the sub-domain and tested. The CMRT data on the civicrm.org system will be moved to the subn-domain CiviCRM.

The sub-domain will go-live and the civicrm.org system will be decommissioned.

This document describes the steps in building the simulation PC.

## TODO List


## Aspects of the VentraIP hosting system

The following are aspects of the current VentraIP hosting configuration. These features will be replicated on the server.

* The webserver used is Apache2. However there is no permission to */etc/apqache2/sites-available/xxx.conf* to help understand the configuration. 
* The user account name is *cmrailtr*. All files and directories have owner and group of *cmrailtr*.
* Files have chmod permissions of 664 by default.
* Directories have chmod permissions of 775 by default.
* public_html is the directory for WordPress. i.e. */home/cmtailtr/public_html*.
* A symbolic link exists from *www* to *public_html*. Thus */home/cmrailtr/www* is also a path to WordPress.
* home directory listing
```bash
[cmrailtr@s03dd ~]$ ls -l
total 68
lrwxrwxrwx  1 cmrailtr cmrailtr    34 Feb 12  2021 access-logs -> /etc/apache2/logs/domlogs/cmrailtr
drwxr-x---  3 cmrailtr mail      4096 Apr  8 00:17 etc
drwx------  3 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 May 13 03:35 logs
drwxrws--- 19 nobody   cmrailtr  4096 May 20  2021 lscache
drwx------  2 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 Jun  9  2025 lscmData
drwxr-x--x 12 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 May 11 18:08 mail
drwxr-x---  3 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 Feb 12  2021 public_ftp
drwxr-x---  6 cmrailtr nobody    4096 May 13 00:57 public_html
drwxr-xr-x  5 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 May  2 17:44 ssl
drwxr-xr-x  8 cmrailtr cmrailtr 12288 May 13 08:27 tmp
drwxr-xr-x  2 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 Jun  3  2025 virtualenv
drwx------  2 cmrailtr cmrailtr  4096 Mar 23  2022 wordpress-backups
lrwxrwxrwx  1 cmrailtr cmrailtr    11 Feb 12  2021 www -> public_html

[cmrailtr@s03dd ~]$ ls /etc/apache2/logs/domlogs/cmrailtr -l
total 876
-rw-r----- 2 root cmrailtr  39930 May 13 08:45 cmrailtrail.org.au
-rw-r----- 2 root cmrailtr 846564 May 13 08:44 cmrailtrail.org.au-ssl_log

[cmrailtr@s03dd ~]$ mysql --version
mysql  Ver 15.1 Distrib 10.6.19-MariaDB, for Linux (x86_64) using readline 5.1
[cmrailtr@s03dd ~]$ mariadb --version
mariadb  Ver 15.1 Distrib 10.6.19-MariaDB, for Linux (x86_64) using readline 5.1
[cmrailtr@s03dd ~]$ php --version
PHP 8.3.30 (cli) (built: Mar 27 2026 16:12:10) (NTS)
Copyright (c) The PHP Group
Zend Engine v4.3.30, Copyright (c) Zend Technologies
    with Zend OPcache v8.3.30, Copyright (c), by Zend Technologies

[cmrailtr@s03dd ~]$ cat /etc/hosts
# Generated by SolusVM
127.0.0.1               localhost localhost.localdomain
::1                     localhost localhost.localdomain
10.2.0.18               as.syd.hostingplatform.net.au
110.232.143.15          s03dd.syd6.hostingplatform.net.au s03dd

```

## Server Initial Setup

* Obtained a PC with 3GHz quad core, 8GB RAM, and 240GB SSD.
* Downloaded latest Ubuntu Server 26.04 iso file. from [https://ubuntu.com/download/server](https://ubuntu.com/download/server)
* Used *Startup Disk Creator* to copy iso file to USB drive.
* Installed USB iso image to the PC.
* Configured the server as:
  * Your name: CMRT
  * Server name: cmrailtr
  * Username: cmrailtr <-- This is a replication of the Username for the VentraIP account. Resulting in *Owner* and *Group* being *cmrailtr*.
  * password: f6d
* Release has corrupted */etc/apt/sources.list.d/ubuntu.sources* file. Was missing the line: *URIs: http://nz.archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/*
* Performed update and upgrqade. Doesn't use any snap applications.
* Setup fixed wifi address of *192.168.1.101* for connection to the local lan.
* Installed open-ssh server. Check with: *$ systemctl status ssh*
* Able to connect, viua SSH, from a remote system into this server.
* A bin directory was created to hold python or bash scripts. E.g. Backup utilities. Need to disconnect SSH, then reconnect SSH, to invoke.

## Static wifi address

The following /etc/netplan/01-wifi-101-config.yaml file was created, so *$ netplan apply* would invoke the wifi at address *192.168.1.101*

```yaml
# This is the network config written by 'subiquity'
# Modified by Ian Stewart 2026-05-12
# File: /etc/netplan/01-wifi-101-config.yaml
# After making any changes: $ sudo netplan apply 
network:
  ethernets:
    eno1:
      match:
        macaddress: a0:d3:c1:0a:b8:3e
      set-name: eno1
  version: 2

  # Fixed wifi address of 192.168.1.101 for server in the shed
  wifis:
    wlp2s0:
      dhcp4: false
      addresses:
        - 192.168.1.101/24
      nameservers:
        addresses:
          -  8.8.8.8
          -  192.168.1.254
      access-points:
        AJ:
          password: Stewart77
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 192.168.1.254
```

## Summary of Installation Dependencies

WordPress and CiviCRM have dependencies on:

* Mariadb 11.8.6-5 LTS database. EOL June 2028 or 2030. VentraIP use Mariadb 10.6.19 rather than Mysql
* PHP 8.5 modules. VentraIP currently uses PHP 8.3
* Apache 2.4.66. Assuming VentraIP use Apache2 no permission to access it.
* Ghostscript 10.06.0. Used for part of the PDF processing and reading, generating thumbnails, etc. 



## Note from Ubuntu Installing WordPress

Create the installation directory and download the file from WordPress.org:

sudo mkdir -p /srv/www
sudo chown www-data: /srv/www
curl https://wordpress.org/latest.tar.gz | sudo -u www-data tar zx -C /srv/www

    Note that this sets the ownership to the user www-data, which is potentially insecure, such as when your server hosts multiple sites with different maintainers. You should investigate using a user per website in such scenarios and make the files readable and writable to only those users. This will require configuring PHP-FPM to launch a separate instance per site each running as the site’s user account. In such setup the wp-config.php should (read: if you do it differently you need a good reason) be readonly to the site owner and group and other permissions set to no-access (chmod 400). This is beyond the scope of this guide, however.

## PHP Modules

The apt installation of some PHP modules will also install their dependencies if they have not aready been installed. For example, the main *PHP8.5* module will also install the following dependencies if they are not already installed:

* apache2
* apache2-bin
* apache2-data
* apache2-utils
* libapache2-mod-php8.5
* libapr1t64
* libaprutil1-dbd-sqlite3
* libaprutil1-ldap
* libaprutil1t64
* libargon2-1
* liblua5.4-0
* php-common
* php8.5-cli
* php8.5-common
* php8.5-readline
* ssl-cert

Some PHP modules have other PHP modules built-in. These builtin modules may not available on their own via apt. For example *php8.5-common* contains:

* php8.5-calendar
* php8.5-ctype
* php8.5-exif
* php8.5-ffi
* php8.5-fileinfo
* php8.5-ftp
* php8.5-gettext
* php8.5-iconv
* php8.5-pdo
* php8.5-phar
* php8.5-posix
* php8.5-shmop
* php8.5-sockets
* php8.5-sysvmsg
* php8.5-sysvsem
* php8.5-sysvshm
* php8.5-tokenizer

According to: 
  
[https://github.com/shivammathur/setup-php/wiki/Php-extensions-loaded-on-ubuntu-24.04#php-85](https://github.com/shivammathur/setup-php/wiki/Php-extensions-loaded-on-ubuntu-24.04#php-85) 
  
* PHP extensions loaded on ubuntu 24.04 

8.5 

[PHP Modules] 
* apcu (shared) 
* ast (shared) 
* bcmath (shared) 
* bz2 (shared) 
* calendar (shared) 
* Core (builtin) 
* ctype (shared) 
* curl (shared) 
* date (builtin) 
* dba (shared) 
* dom (shared) 
* ds (shared) 
* enchant (shared) 
* exif (shared) 
* FFI (shared) 
* fileinfo (shared) 
* filter (builtin) 
* ftp (shared) 
* gd (shared) 
* gettext (shared) 
* gmp (shared) 
* hash (builtin) 
* iconv (shared) 
* igbinary (shared) 
* imagick (shared) 
* imap (shared) 
* intl (shared) 
* json (builtin) 
* ldap (shared) 
* lexbor (builtin) 
* libxml (builtin) 
* mbstring (shared) 
* memcache (shared) 
* memcached (shared) 
* mongodb (shared) 
* msgpack (shared) 
* mysqli (shared) 
* mysqlnd (shared) 
* odbc (shared) 
* openssl (builtin) 
* pcntl (builtin) 
* pcre (builtin) 
* PDO (shared) 
* pdo_dblib (shared) 
* PDO_Firebird (shared) 
* pdo_mysql (shared) 
* PDO_ODBC (shared) 
* pdo_pgsql (shared) 
* pdo_sqlite (shared) 
* pdo_sqlsrv (shared) 
* pgsql (shared) 
* Phar (builtin) 
* posix (shared) 
* random (builtin) 
* readline (shared) 
* redis (shared) 
* Reflection (builtin) 
* session (builtin) 
* shmop (shared) 
* SimpleXML (shared) 
* snmp (shared) 
* soap (shared) 
* sockets (shared) 
* sodium (builtin) 
* SPL (builtin) 
* sqlite3 (shared) 
* sqlsrv (shared) 
* standard (builtin) 
* sysvmsg (shared) 
* sysvsem (shared) 
* sysvshm (shared) 
* tidy (shared) 
* tokenizer (shared) 
* uri (builtin) 
* xdebug (shared) 
* xml (shared) 
* xmlreader (shared) 
* xmlwriter (shared) 
* xsl (shared) 
* yaml (shared) 
* Zend OPcache (builtin) 
* zip (shared) 
* zlib (builtin) 
* zmq (shared) 
[Zend Modules] 
* Xdebug (shared) 
* Zend OPcache (builtin)

PHP 8.5. Modules available via atp with 26.04 repository
* libapache2-mod-php8.5  
* libphp8.5-embed 
* php8.5 
* php8.5-amqp 
* php8.5-apcu 
* php8.5-ast 
* php8.5-bcmath 
* php8.5-bz2 
* php8.5-cgi 
* php8.5-cli 
* php8.5-common 
* php8.5-curl 
* php8.5-dba 
* php8.5-decimal 
* php8.5-dev 
* php8.5-ds 
* php8.5-enchant 
* php8.5-excimer 
* php8.5-fpm 
* php8.5-gd 
* php8.5-gearman 
* php8.5-gmagick 
* php8.5-gmp 
* php8.5-gnupg 
* php8.5-http 
* php8.5-igbinary 
* php8.5-imagick 
* php8.5-inotify 
* php8.5-interbase 
* php8.5-intl 
* php8.5-ldap 
* php8.5-libvirt-php 
* php8.5-litespeed 
* php8.5-mailparse 
* php8.5-maxminddb 
* php8.5-mbstring 
* php8.5-mcrypt 
* php8.5-memcache 
* php8.5-memcached 
* php8.5-mongodb 
* php8.5-msgpack 
* php8.5-mysql 
* php8.5-oauth 
* php8.5-odbc 
* php8.5-pcov 
* php8.5-pgsql 
* php8.5-phpdbg 
* php8.5-pq 
* php8.5-ps 
* php8.5-pspell 
* php8.5-psr 
* php8.5-raphf 
* php8.5-readline 
* php8.5-redis 
* php8.5-rrd 
* php8.5-smbclient 
* php8.5-snmp 
* php8.5-soap 
* php8.5-solr 
* php8.5-sqlite3 
* php8.5-ssh2 
* php8.5-stomp 
* php8.5-sybase 
* php8.5-tidy 
* php8.5-uopz 
* php8.5-uploadprogress 
* php8.5-uuid 
* php8.5-xdebug 
* php8.5-xml 
* php8.5-xmlrpc 
* php8.5-xsl 
* php8.5-yac 
* php8.5-yaml 
* php8.5-zip 
* php8.5-zmq 
* php8.5-zstd 


### WordPress PHP Modules
The repository [https://github.com/WordPress/hosting-handbook/blob/main/server-environment.md](https://github.com/WordPress/hosting-handbook/blob/main/server-environment.md) lists the WordPress PHP modules under a variety of catagories from *Required* to *May USe*, etc. Note that installing the main PHP module 

* Built-in extensions (no hosting action required)
pcre 

* Required extensions
json
mysqli

*Highly recommended 
curl
dom
exif
fileinfo
hash
igbinary
imagick
intl
mbstring
openssl
xml
zip

* Recommended 
apcu
memcached
opcache
redis

* Optional 
timezonedb

* May use in certain situations
bc
filter
image
iconv
shmop
simplexml
sodium
xmlreader
zlib

* Extensions are used for file changes, such as updates and plugin/theme installation
ssh2
ftp
sockets

* System Packages
curl
Ghost
ImageMagick
OpenSSL
WebP
AVIF

### CiviCRM Standalone PHP Modules

Required for CiviCRM Core¶

* PHP BCMath - required for calculating financial values in CiviCRM Core.
* PHP Curl - required for many payment processors, the extension manager, and the CiviCRM News dashlet. (WordPress)
* PHP DOM XML - required by CiviCase.
* PHP Multibyte - required for internationalisation and proper encoding of fields.
* PHP Zip - required for unzipping auto-downloaded extensions so they can be installed from the browser.
* PHP INTL - required for outputting localized formatted number strings from CiviCRM 5.28 onwards
* PHP File Information - required for spreadsheet support from 5.44 onwards
* PHP MySQL PDO - required for running tests and working with Drupal (WordPress mysqli)

Note: PHP-FPM appears to be a requirement of CiviCRM Standalone
